feat: on-chain referral program (#1829)
vegaprotocol/specs: protocol/0082-RFPR-on_chain_referral_program.md

# On Chain Referral Program Specification

## Summary

> The aim of the on-chain referral program is to incentivise users and community members to refer new traders by providing benefits for both referrers and referees. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The aim of the on-chain referral program is to allow users of the protocol to incentivise users and community members to refer new traders by voting to provide benefits for referrers and/or referees. 
```

> Whilst a referral program is active, the following benefits will be available to eligible parties:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whilst a referral program is active, the following benefits may be available to eligible parties:
```

Either benefit could be set to zero

Reviewer 2: 💅

- a **referrer** will receive a proportion of all referee taker fees as a **reward**.
- a **referee** will be eligible for a **discount** on any taker fees they incur.

> The size of the reward or discount will be dependent on the benefit tier the referees [team](#team-mechanics) is currently placed in. A team becomes eligible for greater benefits by reaching a minimum running volume over a number of epochs. Both referrers and referees contribute to their teams running volume.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The size of the reward or discount will be dependent on the benefit tier the referee's [team](#team-mechanics) is currently placed in. A team becomes eligible for greater benefits by reaching a minimum running volume over a number of epochs. Both referrers and referees contribute to their team's running volume.
```

On-chain referral programs can be created and updated through [governance proposals](#governance-proposals).

## Network Parameters

- `referralProgram.maxBenefitTiers` - limits the maximum number of [benefit tiers](#benefit-tiers) which can be specified as part of a referral program
- `referralProgram.maxReferralRewardFactor` - limits the maximum reward factor which can be specified as part of a referral program
- `referralProgram.maxReferralDiscountFactor` - limits the maximum discount factor which can be specified as part of a referral program governance proposal

> - `referralProgram.maxPartyVolumePerEpoch` - limits the volume which is eligible each epoch for referral program mechanisms

Reviewer 2: Presumably this would need to be scaled by the asset's quantum?

Reviewer: Yeah I'd expect this to be specified in terms of quantum

Author: This doesn't get scaled, rather the volume of a parties trades are scaled into quantum units to compare to this value.

Will make this clearer though.

- `referralProgram.minStakedVegaTokens` - limits team creation to parties staking at least this number of tokens

## Governance Proposals

> An on-chain referral program can be proposed via governance. As part of the proposal, the proposer specifies the following fields:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enabling or changing the terms of the on-chain referral program can be proposed via governance. As part of the proposal, the proposer specifies the following fields:
```

- `name`: name of the referral program
- `benefit_tiers`: a list of dictionaries with the following fields

>   - `minimum_running_volume`: the required `running_team_volume` for a team to access this tier

Reviewer 2: Another to scale by `quantum` I presume, to make it comparable across markets (I am assuming this is a cross-market thing).

Author: Same as this [comment](https://github.com/vegaprotocol/specs/pull/1829/files#r1262678183).

Will make it clearer again though 👍

  - `referral_reward_factor`: the proportion of the referees taker fees to be rewarded to the referrer
  - `referral_discount_factor`: the proportion of the referees taker fees to be discounted

> - `start_epoch`: the first epoch the program will become `STATE_ACTIVE` and benefits will be enabled

Reviewer: I think the interaction between this and the proposal's enactment date might be annoying.

Perhaps it would be better to say the programme becomes active on the next epoch change after the enactment date/time of the proposal is reached?

> - `end_epoch`: the first epoch the program will become `STATE_CLOSED` and benefits will be disabled

Reviewer 3: Intuitively to me this would be the last active epoch rather than the first inactive

> - `end_epoch`: the first epoch the program will become `STATE_CLOSED` and benefits will be disabled

Reviewer: I think this might be better off as a date/time, where the programme ends at the first epoch end after the date/time is reached.

Also, we should be clear whether other programmes remain "stacked" until they end or if the most recently enacted programme should replace all others, e.g. do we have this:

1. Propose programme A starting 1st Jan and ending 31st Dec
2. Proposal accepted and programme A begins on 1st Jan
3. Propose programm B starting 1st June ending 31st Aug
4. Proposal accepted and programme B begins on 1st June
5. All programmes stop on 31st Aug

OR

1. Propose programme A starting 1st Jan and ending 31st Dec
2. Proposal accepted and programme A begins on 1st Jan
3. Propose programm B starting 1st June ending 31st Aug
4. Proposal accepted and programme B begins on 1st June
5. Programme B stops and programme A resumes on 31st Aug
6. Programme A stops on 31st Dec

In my opinion it should probably be the first option, which seems simpler to reason about and implement. A series of programmes can still be created by using different enactment dates, and when we have multiple actions in a single governance proposal these could all be combined to one series.

```protobuf
message NewReferralProgram{
    changes: ReferralProgramConfiguration{
        name: "Vega Protocol Q4 Referral Program"
        benefit_tiers: [
            {
                "minimum_running_volume": 10000,
                "referral_reward_factor": 0.000,
                "referral_discount_factor": 0.000,
            },
            {
                "minimum_running_volume": 20000,
                "referral_reward_factor": 0.005,
                "referral_discount_factor": 0.005,
            },
            {
                "minimum_running_volume": 30000,
                "referral_reward_factor": 0.010,
                "referral_discount_factor": 0.010,
            },
        ],
        start_epoch: 100,
        end_epoch: 128,
        window_length: 7,
    }
}
```

When submitting a referral program proposal through governance the following conditions apply:
- a proposer cannot set a `start_epoch` or `end_epoch` less than or equal to the current epoch.
- a proposer cannot set an `end_epoch` less than or equal to the `start_epoch`.
- the number of tiers in `benefit_tiers` must be less than or equal to the network parameter `referralProgram.maxBenefitTiers`.

> - all `referral_reward_factor` values must be less than or equal to the network parameter `referralProgram.maxReferralRewardFactor`.

Reviewer 2: greater than or equal to `0` and ...

- all `referral_discount_factor` values must be less than or equal to the network parameter `referralProgram.maxReferralDiscountFactor`.

> - `window_length` must be an integer greater than zero.

Reviewer 2: strictly greater than '0`?

| `STATUS_PROPOSED`  | No               | Governance proposal valid and accepted                    | Governance proposal voting period ends               |
| `STATUS_REJECTED`  | No               | Governance vote fails                                     | na                                                   |
| `STATUS_PENDING`   | No               | Governance vote passes                                    | Current epoch greater than or equal to `start_epoch` |
| `STATUS_STOPPED`   | No               | There is already an existing program with `STATUS_ACTIVE` | na                                                   |
| `STATUS_ACTIVE`    | Yes              | Previously `STATUS_PENDING`                               | Current epoch less than or equal to `end_epoch`      |
| `STATUS_CLOSED`    | No               | Previously `STATUS_ACTIVE`                                | na                                                   |              

## Team Mechanics
A team is comprised of a referrer and all their referees. There can only ever be one referrer per team but the number of referees is unlimited.

> ### Creating a team

Reviewer: We should make this "Creating or updating a team" and note that sending the transaction a second or subsequent time must not change the referal code/team ID but should cause the metadata (name, URL, image) to be updated.

To create a team and generate a referral code, a party must fulfil the following criteria:

- party must not currently be a **referrer**
- party must not currently be a **referee**
- party must be staking at least `referralProgram.minStakedVegaTokens` tokens.

This staking requirement is constant. If a referrer un-stakes enough tokens to fall below the requirement, they and their referees will no long be eligible for program benefits. If the referrer re-stakes enough tokens to fulfil the staking requirement, the team will become eligible for referral program benefits.

> A separate URL hosted on IPFS should allow a party to connect their Vega wallet and fill in the following optional team information:

Reviewer 2: Is this a front end requirement? In that case that can be left as an aside but we should formulate what the node has to provide in terms of transactions it accepts to facilitate this. 

And perhaps it's best not to talk about the front-end part in the protocol part of the spec.

Reviewer 3: Yeah I vote kill anything non-protocol related (even datanodey things make me sad)

Reviewer: Yeah I'd remove front end requirements, we just need the transactions we define and data node APIs to facilitate the front end, in this spec.

There should be a front end spec/ticket (check with FE team what they need) as well for this though.

- name: an optional team name to be added to the referral banner.
- url: an optional link to a team forum, discord, etc.
- image: optional image data to be used when creating the referral banner.

The party can then generate a team id by approving a transaction generated by the dApp. This team id should be associated with referrers public key by the network.

As well as generating a referral code the dApp should then generate a banner with the referrers optional fields which they can use to invite referees.

### Joining a team

To become a referee, a referee must create a key (programmatically or through a dApp) and then send a transaction to associate their key with an existing team.

message JoinTeam{
    id: "abcd3fgh1jklmn0pqf5tuvwzyz"
}

A user should also be able to do this process by approving a transaction from a dApp.

> ### Team epoch and running volumes

Reviewer 2: More `quantum` scaling ...

Reviewer 2: Ah, I see the `quantum` scaling now; so maybe just a clarification near the top of the spec that when we talk of volume we mean it's scaled by quantum already.

## Benefit mechanics

### Setting benefit factors

Whilst a referral program is `STATUS_ACTIVE`, at the start of an epoch the network must set the `referral_reward_factor` and `referral_discount_factor` for each referee. This is done by identifying a referees team and identifying the teams current benefit tier. A teams benefit tier is defined as the highest tier for which their `team_running_volume` is greater or equal to the tiers `minimum_running_volume`. If a party does not qualify for any tier, both values are set to `0`.

```psuedo
Given:
    benefit_tiers=[
        {
            "minimum_running_volume": 10000,
            "referral_reward_factor": 0.001,
            "referral_discount_factor": 0.001,
        },
        {
            "minimum_running_volume": 20000,
            "referral_reward_factor": 0.005,
            "referral_discount_factor": 0.005,
        },
        {
            "minimum_running_volume": 30000,
            "referral_reward_factor": 0.010,
            "referral_discount_factor": 0.010,
        },
    ]

And:
    team_running_volume=22353

Then:
    referral_reward_factor=0.005

>     referral_reward_factor=0.005

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    referral_discount_factor=0.005
```

```

These benefit factors are then fixed for the duration of the next epoch.

### Applying benefit factors

Whenever a fee is incurred by a referee (either during continuous trading or on auction exit) the network must apply referral program benefits.

The network can first calculate individual fee components following the [fees specification](./0029-FEES-fees.md#calculating-fees) and apply any usual checks.

The network must then:

- Calculate the rewards due to the referrer.
    ```pseudo
    infrastructure_fee_reward = floor(infrastructure_fee * referral_reward_factor) 
    liquidity_fee_reward = floor(liquidity_fee * referral_reward_factor) 
    maker_fee_reward = floor(maker_fee * referral_reward_factor) 
    ```
- Calculate the discounts due to the referee.
    ```pseudo
    infrastructure_fee_discount = floor(infrastructure_fee * referral_discount_factor)

>     liquidity_fee_discount = floor(liquidity_fee * referral_discount_factor)

Reviewer 2: I just wonder whether the above are used consistently with the sprit of the numbers in the above example. Because with increasing volume, I see the reward factors increasing (good) but then I'd expect 

```
floor(liquidity_fee * (1-referral_discount_factor))
```

Reviewer 3: This is the discount no? It would be weird if `discount = x * (1-discount_factor)`

Author: Not sure I follow, your equation would give a discounted fee rather the discount to be applied no?

We could do it that way (and then not have to update the fees) but the logic for calculating the discount and then applying it to the fee is so we could then expose the discount value through an API.

(Which I now realise isn't actually in the spec - will add that).

Reviewer 2: Sorry my bad: I was reading it wrong - I was reading new fee (which isn't what it said, sorry), rather than discount. Yes setting discount to this is correct.

    maker_fee_discount = floor(maker_fee * referral_discount_factor)
    ```
- And then update the fees.
    ```pseudo
    infrastructure_fee = infrastructure_fee - infrastructure_fee_reward - infrastructure_fee_discount
    liquidity_fee = liquidity_fee - liquidity_fee_reward - liquidity_fee_discount
    maker_fee = maker_fee - maker_fee_reward - maker_fee_discount
    ```

Note the rewards and discounts are floored rather than raised to ensure the final infrastructure fee cannot be negative.

The network can then carry out the normal fee transfers using the updated fee amounts followed by additional transfers from the referees general account to the referrers general account. These transfers will use the following new transfer types.

- `TRANSFER_TYPE_MAKER_FEE_REWARD_PAY`
- `TRANSFER_TYPE_MAKER_FEE_REWARD_DISTRIBUTE`
- `TRANSFER_TYPE_LIQUIDITY_FEE_REWARD_PAY`
- `TRANSFER_TYPE_LIQUIDITY_FEE_REWARD_DISTRIBUTE`
- `TRANSFER_TYPE_INFRASTRUCTURE_FEE_REWARD_PAY`

> - `TRANSFER_TYPE_INFRASTRUCTURE_FEE_REWARD_DISTRIBUTE`

Reviewer 3: Do we need the pay and distribute side of the types if it's done in one transfer rather than to some holding bucket?

Author: Yep, good point can remove the distributes thanks 👍

- a **referrer** will receive a proportion of all referee taker fees as a **reward**.
- a **referee** will be eligible for a **discount** on any taker fees they incur.

The size of the reward or discount will be dependent on the benefit tier the referee's [team](#team-mechanics) is currently placed in. A team becomes eligible for greater benefits by reaching a minimum running volume over a number of epochs. Both referrers and referees contribute to their team's running volume.

On-chain referral programs can be created and updated through [governance proposals](#governance-proposals).

## Network Parameters

- `referralProgram.maxBenefitTiers` - limits the maximum number of [benefit tiers](#benefit-tiers) which can be specified as part of a referral program
- `referralProgram.maxReferralRewardFactor` - limits the maximum reward factor which can be specified as part of a referral program
- `referralProgram.maxReferralDiscountFactor` - limits the maximum discount factor which can be specified as part of a referral program governance proposal
- `referralProgram.maxPartyVolumePerEpoch` - limits the volume in quantum units which is eligible each epoch for referral program mechanisms

> - `referralProgram.minStakedVegaTokens` - limits team creation to parties staking at least this number of tokens

Reviewer 2: @barnabee / @cdummett / @TomMcL do you see any value to have, on top of this minimum, a requirement for extra vega tokens for each team member on the team?

Author: Can definitely see the value, adds a disadvantage to teams merging to access higher tiers which I think is good

I think though if we add this we will need to add supporting features for the referrer like being able to remove "dead-weight" team members and possibly "approve" new team members which is added complexity for what I feel should be a fairly simple referral program (at least at first).

Reviewer 2: @barnabee says - not needed.

| `STATUS_PENDING`     | No               | Governance vote passes                                    | End of epoch after network reaches proposal `enactment_timestamp` |
| `STATUS_ACTIVE`      | Yes              | Previously `STATUS_PENDING`                               | End of epoch after network reaches proposal `closing_timestamp`   |
| `STATUS_CLOSED`      | No               | Previously `STATUS_ACTIVE`                                | New governance proposal submitted to the network                  |              

## Team Mechanics
A team is comprised of a referrer and all their referees. There can only ever be one referrer per team but the number of referees is unlimited.

### Creating / updating a team

To create a team and generate a referral code, a party must fulfil the following criteria:

- party must not currently be a **referrer**
- party must not currently be a **referee**
- party must be staking at least `referralProgram.minStakedVegaTokens` tokens.
- party must not have a liquidity provision in any of the following states:
    - `STATUS_ACTIVE`
    - `STATUS_PENDING`
    - `STATUS_UNDEPLOYED`

> This staking requirement is constant. If a referrer un-stakes enough tokens to fall below the requirement, they and their referees will no long be eligible for program benefits. If the referrer re-stakes enough tokens to fulfil the staking requirement, the team will become eligible for referral program benefits.

Author: Do we want a referrer un-staking to punish referees also?

Or should we do something more along the lines of, set `referral_reward_factor` of all referees to `0` until the staking requirement is met (i.e. they receive no rewards).

Reviewer 2: I would just say that if referrer hasn't staked enough you don't get any of the benefits (both referrer and referred).

    - the `window_length` must be an integer strictly greater than zero.
1. A referral program should be started the first epoch change after the `enactment_datetime` is reached.
1. A referral program should be closed the first epoch change after the `closing_timestamp` is reached.
1. If a referral program is already active and a proposal `enactment_datetime` is reached, the referral program is updated at the next epoch change.
    - Propose program A with `enactment_timestamp` 1st Jan and `closing_timestamp` 31st Dec.
    - Proposal for program A accepted and begins first epoch after 1st Jan.
    - Propose program B with `enactment_timestamp` 1st June and `closing_timestamp` 31st Aug.
    - Proposal for program B accepted and overrides program A the first epoch after 1st June.
    - Program is closed first epoch after 31st Aug, there should be no active proposals.

### Team Mechanics

#### Creating / updating teams

1. If a party **is not** currently a referrer, the party can **create** a team, by submitting a signed `CreateParty` transaction.
1. If a party **is** currently a referrer, the party can **update** a team, by submitting a signed `CreateParty` transaction.

> 1. If one or more of the following conditions are not met, any `CreateParty` transaction should be rejected.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. If a party **is not** currently a referrer, the party can **create** a team, by submitting a signed `CreateTeam` transaction.
1. If a party **is** currently a referrer, the party can **update** a team, by submitting a signed `CreateTeam` transaction.
1. If one or more of the following conditions are not met, any `CreateTeam` transaction should be rejected.
```

    - party must not currently be a **referee**.
    - party must be staking at least `referralProgram.minStakedVegaTokens` tokens.
    - party must not have an active liquidity provision.
1. If a referrer removes sufficient stake to not meet the required tokens, the referrers team should not be eligible for the following referral program benefits:
    - team member trades should not contribute to their teams volume.
    - the referrer should not be rewarded for any referee taker fees.
    - referees should not receive any discount on their taker fees.
1. If the referrer of a team currently not eligible for benefits re-stakes enough tokens, their team will become eligible for benefits from the next epoch.

1. If a party has created a team (i.e. is a referrer) any future liquidity provision transactions from the party should be rejected.

#### Joining / moving teams

> 1. If a party **is not** currently a **referee**, the party can join a team by submitting a signed `JoinParty` transaction.
> 1. If a party **is** currently a **referee**, the party can move team (at the start of the next epoch) by submitting a signed `JoinParty` transaction.
> 1. If a party **is** currently a **referee** and submits multiple `JoinParty` transactions in an epoch, the latest valid `JoinParty` transaction will be applied.
> 1. If one or more of the following conditions are not met,  any `JoinParty` transaction should be rejected.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. If a party **is not** currently a **referee**, the party can join a team by submitting a signed `JoinTeam` transaction.
1. If a party **is** currently a **referee**, the party can move team (at the start of the next epoch) by submitting a signed `JoinTeam` transaction.
1. If a party **is** currently a **referee** and submits multiple `JoinTeam` transactions in an epoch, the latest valid `JoinTeam` transaction will be applied.
1. If one or more of the following conditions are not met,  any `JoinTeam` transaction should be rejected.
```

        },
    ]

And:
    team_running_volume=22353

Then:
    referral_reward_factor=0.005
    referral_discount_factor=0.005
```

These benefit factors are then fixed for the duration of the next epoch.

### Applying benefit factors

Referral program benefit factors are applied by modifying [the fees](./0029-FEES-fees.md) paid by a party (either during continuous trading or on auction exit).

## APIs

The Teams API should expose the following information:

- a list of all **teams** (by `id`), their founding **referrer**, and any current **referees**
- a list of all **teams** (by `id`) and the following metrics:
  - current `team_running_volume` (value at the start of the epoch)
  - current `referral_reward_factor` applied to referee taker fees
  - current `referral_discount_factor` applied to referee taker fees
  - any data required for additional reward metrics

The Trades API should now also expose the following additional information for every trade:

- Referral program rewards
  - `infrastructure_fee_reward`
  - `liquidity_fee_reward`
  - `maker_fee_reward`
- Referral program discounts
  - `infrastructure_fee_discount`
  - `liquidity_fee_discount`

>   - `maker_fee_discount`

Author: Think this hopefully covers (1) from the [thread](https://vegaprotocol.slack.com/archives/CAHA5EX0F/p1690293264541239).
